docs: add innovation roadmap comparison (#341)
open-energy-transition/open-tyndp: doc/innovation_roadmap.rst

   :header-rows: 1

   * - Innovation Roadmap Details
     - Comparison with PyPSA-Eur / Open-TYNDP   
   * - Dashboard: All graphs for the TYNDP 2026 report will be integrated into a reactive dashboard
     - Open TYNDP will feature a dashboard that allows users to explore the results of the scenarios interactively. PyPSA-Eur has introduced automated plotting of energy balance maps and heatmap time series. Recent updates include interactive bus-balance plots and heat-source maps.
   * - Improvement of Reference Values
           - Update residential space heating and hot water technology shares from national statistics rather than 2019 EUROSTAT energy statistics
     - PyPSA-Eur recently updated its energy balances to JRC-IDEES-2021, switching the reference year to 2019. Open-TYNDP has refined electricity demand and biomass potentials to achieve an exact match with reference values.
   * - Addition of climate year functionality
         - Integrate weather years into energy demand scenarios including heating demand (electricity demand from heat pumps and boilers) and all final energy demands. 
         - Produce a set of sectoral energy demand profiles for each scenario.

>      - PyPSA-Eur now supports spanning multiple consecutive or meteorological weather years in a single optimization. It provides pre-built cutouts for a wide range of years (e.g., 1996, 2010–2023).

Author: Added

```rst
     - PyPSA-Eur now supports spanning multiple consecutive or meteorological weather years in a single optimization. It provides pre-built cutouts for a wide range of years (e.g., 1996, 2010–2023). 

       **Current Implementation Scope**

       The final energy demand is based on historical data in PyPSA-Eur from Eurostat.

       **Potential for full integration**

       Total electricity demand is endogenous in the optimisation, as it is calculated from energy service demands and the endogenous choice of demand technologies (such as heat-pumps or gas boilers). 
       The performance of the demand technologies as well as the demand itself is therefore a function of weather parameters calculated from climate scenarios. This could be integrated into the automated Open TYNDP workflow.
```

     - Open-TYNDP has implemented the attachment of exogenous TYNDP gas and hydrogen demands to the network. PyPSA-Eur generates hourly profiles for all energy carriers as a core function of its sector-coupled workflow.

Pan-European Market Modelling Database App
==========================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1    

   * - Innovation Roadmap Details
     - Comparison with Open-TYNDP
   * - The PEMMDB app will provide an API to allow efficient data transfer into the PLEXOS model 
     - The Open TYNDP workflow already automates data integration though REST API calls to various sources, as well as automatically downloading, extracting, transforming and filtering data for all of its inputs.

Quality Control
===============

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1    

   * - Innovation Roadmap Details
     - Comparison with Open-TYNDP 
   * - Perform sanity checks on each scenario, for example preventing simultaneous dispatch of electrolysers and H2/gas-fired plants, ensuring reasonable levels of curtailment and Energy Not Served, comparing generator margins, corss-sector assets and storage investment costs

>      - <Validation?>

Author: Done

System Modelling Innovations
============================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1    

   * - Innovation Roadmap Details
     - Comparison with Open-TYNDP 
   * - Hydrogen storage
         - differentiate between short-term and seasonal storage needs
         - better representation of operational constraints of storage facilities such as salt caverns and aquifers
         - align national and modelling studies on storage capacities
         - incorporate techno-economic constraints of hydrogen supply
         - improve pipelines modelling to reflect transport flexibility

>      - PyPSA-Eur recently fixed bugs related to underground H2 cavern creation. Open-TYNDP includes regionalized H2 salt cavern potentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Open-TYNDP follows the same methodology as TYNDP for hydrogen infrastructure. One could adapt back to PyPSA-Eur assumptions with some small modifications.
     - In PyPSA-Eur
   **Already Implemented**:
 - PyPSA-Eur distinguishes between long-term storage in salt caverns and aquifers, and short-term storage in medium or high-pressure steel tanks
- Technical potential constraints: Underground storage capacities in salt caverns are limited based on technical potential estimations from Caglayan et al. (2020)
- Environmental considerations: Default configuration includes only nearshore underground storage potential (within 50 km of shore) due to environmental concerns regarding highly saline brine disposal. However, the model offers flexibility to select from three storage types: nearshore (<50 km from sea), onshore (>50 km from sea), or offshore
- Pipeline modeling: Endogenous optimization of methane-to-hydrogen pipeline retrofitting, hydrogen transport losses, and transport flow modeling in the pipeline network

 **Could Be Implemented (Minor Code Extensions):**
- Minimum hydrogen storage fill levels to account for working gas requirements
- Electrolyser ramp-up and ramp-down constraints reflecting technical flexibility limits
- Minimum run requirements for electrolysers (must-run constraints)
- Line packing in H2 pipelines: Could be modeled as additional storage capacity

**Hard to Implement:**

- Physical hydrogen flows with pressure modeling: Full representation of pressure-dependent flow dynamics would require fundamental changes to the transport model architecture and substantially increase computational complexity
```

   * - Integration of Hybrid heat pumps
         - Ensure hybrid systems are correctly sized for applications, considering peak demand scenarios
         - Ensure assumptions incorporate both economics and behavioural considerations
     - PyPSA-Eur refined heat pump CAPEX allocations and COP approximations. It also introduced river- and sea-water sourced heat pumps.
   * - Grid topology
         - Incorporate more detailed representation of H2 network topology that approximates physical H2 flow to ensure key H2 corridors and infrastructure are well represented
     - PyPSA-Eur supports administrative clustering (NUTS0 to NUTS3), allowing the network to be resolved at highly granular levels. Open-TYNDP uses the TYNDP H2 topology, including Z1 and Z2 setup.
   * - Gas turbine usage and peaking unit utilisation 
         - Explore dynamic operational needs of gas turbines given increasing reliance of variable renewable resources
         - Update assumptions around CH4 to H2 retrofitting projects, which have struggled to compete in current markets

>      - Open TYNDP allows for endogenous retrofitting of CH4 pipeline capacity to H2.

Author: Done

   * - EV Modelling
         - Ensure that electricity flows follow charge/discharge cycles of EV batteries

>      - PyPSA-Eur refined Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) dispatch capacity and temperature-dependent energy demand correction factors for EVs.

Reviewer: - We do not see that charging/discharging behaviour at the same time (common problem in ESM) since we apply small marginal costs on the charging/discharging

   * - Economic Assessment
         - incorporate economic assessment of key technologies such as Steam Methane Reformers (SMR), nuclear plants, ammonia regasification terminals which are currently represented without economic attributes
     - Open TYNDP incorporates default capital investment and fixed and variable operation cost assumptions for all technologies
   * - Methane pricing structure and formation
            - Resolve pricing inconsistences between synthetic natural gas, biomethane and hydrogen
     - TODO
   * - Ammonia Import costs
           - Ensure ammonia import costs reflect the entire supply chain

>      - Open TYNDP includes location and capacities of European ammonia plants. Ammonia import prices and volumes can be configured.

Reviewer: - supply chain costs can be modelled also directly for all green carriers with PyPSA-Eur and Trace, see this publications https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-025-60652-1

   * - Distinction in Hydrogen usage
           - Separating hydrogen used directly as a gas from hydrogen used as a feedstock for producing synthetic fuels.
     - PyPSA-Eur added a suite of technologies for methanol-to-power, reforming, and kerosene, and updated locations/capacities for ammonia plants to accurately distribute demand.
   * - Flexibility of heat pumps
           - Incorporate heat-pump modelling into PLEXOS to better represent flexibility, thermal inertia and heat storage
     - Open TYNDP uses an energy-to-power ratio constraiint for thermal energy storage. Proportional sizing is used for chargers and dischargers.
       Includes an option to calculate dynamic storage capacities for thermal energy storage. Also includes aquifer thermal energy storage, and supplemental heating such as booster heat pumps.
   * - Modelling of E-fuels 
           - Allow transportation of e-methanol, e-methane and e-kerosene via pipelines, ships or tanker trucks
           - Incorporate full load hours into spatial optimisation of e-fuel refineries and supply infrastructure

>      - <TODO>

Reviewer: * transportation of e-fuels currently not included but could be added, same for the full load hours

   * - Higher granularity topology

>            - Adding more nodes per country and differentiating between prosumer and non-prosumer households for accurate grid interaction modeling

Reviewer: that is exaclty what PyPSA-Eur was designed for highly resolved spatial and temporal modelling
- higher spatial resolution is possible, also the data can be added on a higher spatial resolution with finer granularity
- disitribution grid with associated costs and losses can be modelled, but data for existing infrastructure of the distribution grid as well as regional investment costs is missing
- on the distribution level connected are EV charging, rooftop PV, electricity demand for invidivual heating technologies
- different types of PV panels can be modelled on the distribution grid level (various publications about this by Parisa https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-025-61492-9, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261924001041

     - PyPSA-Eur supports multiple resource classes for wind and solar per region to improve accuracy at low spatial resolutions. It also allows for behind-the-meter rooftop PV modeling.
   * - Improved modelling of prosumer demand
     - Open TYNDP allows connection of microgeneration e.g. residential solar PV to be connected to low voltage buses.
       Residential and utility scale PV are treated separately, with separate rules in the workflow to build and cluster rooftop potentials.
       Open TYNDP also distinguishes between stationary battery storage and EV batteries.
   * - Consider peaking units as expansion candidates
     - PyPSA-Eur is a capacity expansion model by nature and can be set to build new peaking units whenever they are the cost-optimal way to ensure reliability.
   * - Check on remaining CO2 emissions in 2050
     - TODO
   * - Implementation of hybrid electrolyser plants
           - Implementing plants connected to both dedicated renewables and the grid to optimize production and market coupling

>      - Open-TYNDP implements offshore wind hubs where wind farms can connect to both the network and P2G units for H2 production. PyPSA-Eur added minimum unit dispatch settings for electrolysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Open-TYNDP implements offshore wind hubs where wind farms can connect to both the network and P2G units for H2 production. 
```
And then added points from the comment above

   * - Hydrogen imports and pipeline assessment
           - Modeling practical volumes and prices for pipeline imports to evaluate energy security and dependence.
     - PyPSA-Eur implemented renewable energy imports for H2, ammonia, methanol, and oil with configurable prices and volume limits.
   * - Geographical correlation in hydrogen production

>      - Open-TYNDP ensures geographical correlation by attaching planning-year dependent renewable profiles from the PECD to specific generators within interconnected zones

Reviewer: Maybe we should always keep the same order when answering the points. Start with what is done in Open-TYNDP (in most cases it is just applying methodology from TYNDP), and second what is implemented in PyPSA-Eur, what could be implemented, what is hard to implement

Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) Proposals
===========================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1    

   * - Stakeholder Reference Group
     - Open TYNDP Innovation Roadmap
   * - Synthetic Fuels
           - Incorporating methanol for the maritime sector to align with decarbonization goals and identify infrastructure needs.

>      - PyPSA-Eur introduced methanol-based technologies (e.g., biomass-to-methanol) in its 2024.09 release. Open-TYNDP defaults maritime demand to methanol.

Reviewer: Methanol can be used also in various other sectors (e.g. as back up power, in industry, as kerosene). See publication here https://arxiv.org/html/2505.09277v1

         - Include missing non-EU countries such as Norway, Switzerland, and Serbia. 
         - Split the UK into separate datasets for Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
     - PyPSA-Eur covers the full ENTSO-E area and has recently integrated Ukraine, Moldova, and Kosovo. It supports NUTS-level clustering across these regions.
   * - 5.5 Stable ETM server for 2026 cycle
         - ensure that a stable version of the ETM is available with consistent data and features for the duration of the 2026 cycle
     - Open-source frameworks achieve stability through version control. To manage computational environment, conda-lock files are used for dependency management and Snakemake version requirements 
       (e.g., minimum version 9.0) to ensure cross-platform reproducibility.
   * - 5.6 Integrate supply tool features in ETM 
            - Merging supply modeling features (CCS, imports, biomass) directly into the ETM to reduce interfaces and provide a coherent energy system representation
     - Open TYNDP already integrates supply and demand features into a full integrated workflow. PyPSA-Eur and Open-TYNDP are inherently integrated cross-sectoral models. 

>        They already include rules for CO2 sequestration potentials (CO2Stop), CCS technologies, carbon networks, regional biomass potentials and transport costs, and automated import price configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       They already include CO2 sequestration potentials and optimising CO2 storage, CCS technologies, carbon networks, regional biomass potentials and transport costs, and automated import price configurations.
```

       Heating capacity sizing is endogenously optimized based on full-year hourly heating demand profiles, ensuring adequate capacity for peak demand periods while minimising total system costs.
       
       **Not included**

       All investment decisions are purely economics-driven based on cost optimization. Behavioral considerations, such as consumer preferences are not currently incorporated.
       Behavioral constraints could be integrated if formulated as explicit technical or policy constraints, for example, maximum deployment rates: 
       Limit annual heat pump installations to realistic adoption curves (e.g., maximum 5% annual increase in heat pump penetration per region)
   * - 8.3 Grid topology
         - Incorporate more detailed representation of H2 network topology that approximates physical H2 flow to ensure key H2 corridors and infrastructure are well represented
     - Detailed H2 network topology is already implemented. 
       H2 flow are represented as a linear transport model. Line packing could be added easily.

>        Physical flows including pressure drops would be harder, but possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Physical flows including pressure drops would be harder and result in a non-linear optimisation.
```

     - Open TYNDP incorporates default capital investment and fixed and variable operation cost assumptions for all technologies
   * - 8.7 Methane pricing structure and formation
            - Resolve pricing inconsistences between synthetic natural gas, biomethane and hydrogen
     - High consistency is assured through using open licensed databases which are checked by multiple people. The automated workflow guarantees same currency year and units
   * - 8.8 Ammonia Import costs
           - Ensure ammonia import costs reflect the entire supply chain
     - Open TYNDP includes location and capacities of European ammonia plants. Ammonia import prices and volumes can be configured.
       Supply chain costs can be modelled directly for all green carriers. See `Neumann et al. (2025) <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-025-60652-1>`_
   * - 8.9 Distinguish between hydrogen use as energy or feedstock 
           - Separating hydrogen used directly as a gas from hydrogen used as a feedstock for producing synthetic fuels.
     - H2 use for energy and feedstock purposes is already clearly distinguished in PyPSA-Eur

>        PyPSA-Eur added a suite of technologies for methanol-to-power, reforming, and kerosene, and updated locations/capacities for ammonia plants to accurately distribute demand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       which adds a suite of technologies for methanol-to-power, reforming, and kerosene, and has updated locations/capacities for ammonia plants to accurately distribute demand.
```

Author: Is this already included in Open TYNDP?

           - endogenous decision on building renovation can be modelled, with country-specific building stock data and renovation costs
           - thermal inertia of buildings is not modelled, could be presented by a free thermal storage
             Includes an option to calculate dynamic storage capacities for thermal energy storage. Also includes aquifer thermal energy storage, and supplemental heating such as booster heat pumps.
   * - 8.11 Modelling of E-fuels 
           - Allow transportation of e-methanol, e-methane and e-kerosene via pipelines, ships or tanker trucks
           - Incorporate full load hours into spatial optimisation of e-fuel refineries and supply infrastructure
     - <TODO>
   * - 8.12 Higher granularity topology
           - Adding more nodes per country and differentiating between prosumer and non-prosumer households for accurate grid interaction modeling
     - 
       PyPSA-Eur was designed for highly resolved spatial and temporal modelling
       PyPSA-Eur supports multiple resource classes for wind and solar per region to improve accuracy at low spatial resolutions. 
       It also allows for behind-the-meter rooftop PV modeling.

>          - higher spatial resolution is possible, also the data can be added on a higher spatial resolution with finer granularity

Reviewer: this somehow has a gray background in the documentation

       
       **Could be implemented**

       Existing studies such as `Zeyen et al. (2024) <https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ad2239>`_ have investigated this with PyPSA
       showing that implementation is possible for Open TYNDP model.
   * - 8.17 Hydrogen imports and pipeline assessment
           - Modeling practical volumes and prices for pipeline imports to evaluate energy security and dependence.
     - PyPSA-Eur implemented renewable energy imports for H2, ammonia, methanol, and oil with configurable prices and volume limits.
   * - 8.18 Geographical correlation in hydrogen production
     - Open-TYNDP ensures geographical correlation by attaching planning-year dependent renewable profiles from the PECD to specific generators within interconnected zones

Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) Proposals
===========================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 50 50
   :header-rows: 1    

   * - Stakeholder Reference Group
     - Open TYNDP Innovation Roadmap
   * - 9.1 Synthetic Fuels
           - Incorporating methanol for the maritime sector to align with decarbonization goals and identify infrastructure needs.

>      - PyPSA-Eur introduced methanol-based technologies (e.g., biomass-to-methanol) in its 2024.09 release. Open-TYNDP defaults maritime demand to methanol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - PyPSA-Eur introduced methanol-based technologies (e.g., biomass-to-methanol) in its 2024.09 release. PyPSA-Eur defaults maritime demand to methanol.
```

           - Update residential space heating and hot water technology shares using more granular national data rather than 2019 EUROSTAT energy statistics
     - Open-TYNDP has refined electricity demand and biomass potentials to achieve an exact match with reference values
     - This challenge is shared by Open TYNDP. For the existing heating technologies in terms of capacities per country the `DG ENER mapping analysis <https://energy.ec.europa.eu/publications/mapping-and-analyses-current-and-future-2020-2030-heatingcooling-fuel-deployment-fossilrenewables-1_en>`_ is used, an update is needed.
       For district heating shares `Fraunhofer ISI data <https://fordatis.fraunhofer.de/handle/fordatis/341.5>`_.
       This data source is also used for geothermal heat potentials.
       PyPSA-Eur recently updated its energy balances to JRC-IDEES-2021, switching the reference year to 2019.
   * - 5.3 Addition of climate year functionality
         - Integrate weather years into energy demand scenarios including heating demand (electricity demand from heat pumps and boilers) and all final energy demands 
         - Produce a set of sectoral energy demand profiles for each scenario

>      - The final energy demand is based on historical data in PyPSA-Eur from Eurostat

Reviewer: Open-TYNDP reproduces TYNDP methodology currently, so same assumptions as TYNDP concerning final energy demand

     - PyPSA-Eur supports NUTS-level clustering across these regions. This makes it relatively easy to create a spatial representation including Norway, Switzerland and Serbia (or any other countries).
   * - 5.5 Stable ETM server for 2026 cycle
           - ensure that a stable version of the ETM is available with consistent data and features for the duration of the 2026 cycle
     - Open-source frameworks achieve stability through version control. To manage computational environment, conda-lock files are used for dependency management and Snakemake version requirements 
       (e.g., minimum version 9.0) to ensure cross-platform reproducibility.
     - ditto
   * - 5.6 Integrate supply tool features in ETM 
            - Merging supply modeling features (CCS, imports, biomass) directly into the ETM to reduce interfaces and provide a coherent energy system representation
     - Open TYNDP currently uses exogenous demand assumptions in line with TYNDP 2024
     - PyPSA-Eur already integrates supply and demand features into a full integrated workflow.
       PyPSA-Eur and Open-TYNDP are inherently integrated cross-sectoral models. 

>        They already include CO_2 sequestration potentials (``CO2Stop``), and optimising CO2 storage, CCS technologies, carbon networks, regional biomass potentials and transport costs, 

Reviewer: I think it would be good to mention that in the open-tyndp column already (CO2 management is already modelled there)

     - Open-TYNDP has implemented the attachment of exogenous TYNDP gas and hydrogen demands to the network.
     - Unlike TYNDP's fixed hydrogen and methane demands, PyPSA-Eur models final energy service demands (industrial process heat, heating, etc.) and endogenously optimises which energy carrier (hydrogen, methane, electricity) meets each demand. This allows the model to capture technology competition and fuel switching based on relative costs and availability.

Pan-European Market Modelling Database App
==========================================

.. list-table::
   :widths: 33 33 34
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Innovation Roadmap Details
     - Current Open TYNDP Implementation  
     - Features available in PyPSA-Eur
   * - The PEMMDB app will provide an API to allow efficient data transfer into the PLEXOS model 
     - The Open TYNDP workflow already automates data integration through REST API calls to various sources, as well as automatically downloading, extracting, transforming and filtering data for all of its inputs.

>      - All features are already implemented in Open TYNDP

Reviewer: rather leave that blank

           - Integrating methane pyrolysis and waste-to-hydrogen processes
     - 
     - PyPSA-Eur has already integrated biomass-to-hydrogen (with or without carbon capture) and supports custom technology adjustments via configuration.
   * - 9.13 Flexibility in modelling
           - Focus on load displacement (shifting demand) rather than just load reduction to maximize renewable use
     - Open TYNDP follows TYNDP methodology so exhibits the same limitation. 
     - PyPSA-Eur has higher flexibility since all sectors are modelled (instead of fixed exogenous demand for H2).
   * - 9.14 Price setting for hydrogen
           - Revise methodology to reflect real-world contracts and costs like dehydrogenation
     - As an integrated sector-coupled model, endogenous pricing of hydrogen includes all represented upstream processes
     - ditto
   * - 9.15 Sensitivity to commodity prices
           - Conduct sensitivity analyses on price fluctuations (gas, oil, H2) to understand investment risks
     - Workflow management tool snakemake enables the simultaneous execution of multiple scenarios with single calls and configuration overrides
     - ditto

>    * - 9.16 Inclusion of emerging technologies

Reviewer: This one does not seem to be bold in the documentation preview, same for 8.13-8.15
